Determining The Age Of Rockfish
Adult rockfish are approximately 20 cm in length or longer. For most divers, this is length of your hand from your fingertip to wrist (looking at your palm). Please check your hand against this length before conducting the survey in order to be as accurate as possible.

Rockfish smaller than your hand (20 cm) should be counted as Juvenile*.
Very young rockfish, pinky-finger-length and smaller, are differently coloured and should be counted as Baby**.

* The only exception to this rule is a Puget Sound rockfish. Due to their small adult size, all Puget Sound rockfish should be counted as Adult.
** Baby rockfish, often up to 18 months age, can look very different from Juveniles and Adults and as such if you can send us video or a photo of the baby rockfish you encounter we can ID them for you.

Species Identification
Divers must be able to identify local rockfish species as adults and juveniles (but note that babies are differently coloured). If you are unsure of species ID let us help by sending us your dive videos or photos of rockfish and we’ll count and ID them for you. Please upload your video to YouTube or Vimeo, and them email us the link. 

The most common species in the Strait of Georgia/Johnstone Strait/Haro Strait include: copper, quillback, yelloweye (red snapper), yellowtail, tiger and Puget Sound rockfish. Other species that may be seen include brown, black and vermilion rockfish amongst others. If you are unsure of a species, record it as UNKNOWN or capture it in a photo for us to ID.

Site Selection
Rockfish surveys should be conducted in areas known to have rockfish, which usually means complex rocky reef: rockfish like rocks! They often hide is crevices and caves. Surveys should not be conducted in areas with poor rockfish habitat such as sandy bottom or mud slopes. GPS coordinates for entry point, plus compass direction along shore from entry point are helpful

Data Collection
One diver should be responsible for recording the data on a slate. Any dive buddies should stay close to the data collector, helping to locate and point out rockfish in the area or to light for videotaping.

Avoid double counting. If the dive has a fixed entry/exit point such as would occur on a shoreline dive, the divers should survey different depths for each direction traveled. For example, survey a depth of 45-60 feet in one direction, returning at a depth of 30-45 feet.

Repeat surveys conducted at the same site are both welcome and necessary in order to build a solid data record for a given area. The idea is to repeat counts under different visibility conditions over an extended period (years). We no longer recommend winter/spring surveying, as data prove that extensive winter hiding occurs.

Bottom Times
Total bottom time is absolutely necessary in order to calculate the abundance of rockfish in a given area. For the survey, bottom times should include any decompression stops.

